[Administrative Code--Citywide Coordination of Open Data Policy and Procedures] 



Ordinance amending San Francisco’s open data policies and procedures and 
establishing the position and duties of Chief Data Officer and Departmental Data 
Coordinators, and amending San Francisco Administrative Code Sections 22D.2 and 
22D.3 to implement these changes.

	NOTE:	Additions are single-underline italics Times New Roman;
	deletions are strike-through italics Times New Roman.
	Board amendment additions are double-underlined;
	Board amendment deletions are strikethrough normal. 
	

	Be it ordained by the people of the City and County of San Francisco:
      Section 1.  Findings.
	(a)  San Francisco has been a leader in open data policy in the United States.  In 2009, 
Mayor Gavin Newsom issued an Executive Directive promoting Open Data.  In 2010, the 
Board of Supervisors expanded on the Directive with the passage of the City’s Open Data 
Policy (Ordinance 293-10), codified in San Francisco’s Administrative Code Section 22D.
	(b)  An open data policy has been shown to drive increased government efficiency 
and civic engagement, leading to social and economic benefits as a result of innovative 
citizen interaction with government.  Social and economic benefits include, but are not limited 
to:
            (1)  Empowering citizens through democratization of information and fostering 
citizen participation in City projects;
            (2)  Supporting early stage entrepreneurship;
            (3)  Encouraging positive environments that contribute to workforce 
development and job creation; and
            (4)  Increasing a positive business environment and promoting public-private 
partnerships.
	(c) City departments should take further steps to make their data sets available to the public in a 
more timely and efficient manner.  San Francisco will improve and expand its Open Data Policy by 
creating the position of Chief Data Officer and Department Data Coordinators to implement the 
standards and policies articulated in the City’s Open Data Policy. 
      Section 2.  The San Francisco Administrative Code is hereby amended by amending 
Sections 22D.2, and 22D.3, to read as follows: 
SEC. 22D.2.  CHIEF DATA OFFICER AND CITY DEPARTMENTS CITY DEPARTMENTS 
REQUIRED TO MAKE DATA AVAILABLE.  
	(a)  Chief Data Officer.   
	In order to coordinate implementation, compliance, and expansion of the City’s Open Data 
Policy, the Mayor shall appoint a Chief Data Officer (CDO) for the City and County of San Francisco.  
The CDO shall be responsible for sharing City data with the public, facilitating the sharing of 
information between City departments, and analyzing how data sets can be used to improve city 
decision making.  To accomplish these objectives, the CDO shall: 
      (1)  Coordinate utilization, maintenance, and updates of the City’s Open Data website, 
currently known as “DataSF;”
      (2)  Oversee the design, adoption by the Committee on Information Technology (COIT) 
and implementation of technical standards for DataSF to ensure that the portal and its datasets 
are implemented, updated, and utilized in accordance with San Francisco’s open data policies;
      (3)  Provide education and analytic tools for City departments to improve and assist 
with their open data efforts;
      (4)  Assist departments with compliance with Open Data policies by working with 
Department Data Coordinators,  collecting and reviewing each department's open data 
implementation plans and creating a template for the departmental quarterly progress reports; 
      (5)  Present an annual updated citywide implementation plan to COIT, the Mayor, and 
Board of Supervisors and respond, as necessary, regarding the status of DataSF in the City;
      (6)  Actively work to further the goals of open data in the City;
      (7)  Coordinate creation and sharing of internal City data sets outside of those 
designated for publication on DataSF;
      (8)  Help establish data standards within and outside the City through collaboration 
with external organizations;
      (9)  Assist City departments with analysis of City data sets to improve decision making; 
and,
      (10)  Analyze and report on the usage of DataSF.
(b)  City Departments
                   (a)  Each City department, board, commission, and agency 
(“Department") shall: 
                  (1)Make reasonable efforts to make available all data sets under the 
Department's control, provided however, that such disclosure shall be consistent with the 
rules and standards promulgated by the CDO and adopted by COIT and with applicable law, 
including laws related to privacy;
                  (2) Conduct quarterly reviews of their progress on providing access to data 
sets requested by the public through the designated web portal beginning six months after the 
appointment of the CDO; and
                  (3) Designate a Data Coordinator (DC) who will oversee implementation and 
compliance with the Open Data Policy within his/her respective department.  Each DC shall work with 
the CDO to implement the City’s open data policies and standards.  The DC shall:
                        (i)  Prepare an Open Data plan for the Department which shall:
                              (1)  Include a timeline for the publication of the Department’s 
open data and a summary of open data efforts planned and/or underway in the Department; 
                              (2)  Include a summary description of all data sets under the 
control of each Department (including data contained in already-operating information technology 
systems);
                              (3)  Prioritize all public data sets for inclusion on DataSF;  
                              (4)  Be updated quarterly after the initial submission to the CDO. 
In the event of unsatisfactory implementation of the plan by the Department and/or disagreement over 
publication of data sets, the CDO may request the Department’s DC appear before COIT; and,
                              (5)  Be published on the department’s web site in addition to the 
DataSF site. 
                              (6)  Ensure data sets comply with the following requirements:
                        (ii)  Review department data sets for potential inclusion on DataSF and 
ensure they comply with the following guidelines:
                              (1)  Data prioritized for publication should be of likely interest to 
the public and should not disclose information that is proprietary, confidential, or protected by law or 
contract;
                              (2)  Data sets that contain personally identifiable information or 
represent potential breaches to security or privacy should be flagged for potential exclusion from 
DataSF; and,
                              (3)  Data sets should be free of charge to the public through the 
web portal.
                  (iii)  Make data sets available, provided that such disclosure is consistent with 
the City’s Open Data Policy, technical standards, and with applicable law, including laws related to 
privacy;
                  (iv)  Catalogue and prioritize the Department’s open data for publication on a 
quarterly basis;
                  (v)  Appear before COIT and respond to questions regarding the Department’s 
compliance with the City’s Open Data policies and standards;
                  (vi)  Conspicuously display his/her contact information (including name, phone 
number or email address) on DataSF with his/her department’s data sets; 
                  (vii)  Monitor comments and public feedback on the Department’s data sets on a 
timely basis;  
                  (viii)  Upon receipt of comments or information requests from the public related 
to data set content and supporting documentation, assess the nature and complexity of the request and 
provide DT with an expected timeframe to resolve the support inquiry as soon as possible; 
                  (ix)  Notify DT upon publication of any updates or corrective action; and,
                  (x)  Notify DT prior to any structural changes to data sets when releasing 
updated data;
(c)  Department of Technology
	The Department of Technology (DT) shall provide and manage a single Internet site (web 
portal) for the City’s public data sets (http://data.sfgov.org or successor site), called “DataSF.”  In 
managing the site, DT shall:
            (1)  Publish data sets with reasonable, user-friendly registration requirements, license 
requirements, or restrictions on the use and distribution of data sets;
            (2)  Indicate data sets that have been recently updated;
            (3)  Ensure that updated data sets retain the original data structure, i.e., the number of 
data elements per record, name, formats and order of the data elements must be structurally consistent 
with the originally approved submission;
            (4)   Use open, non-proprietary standards when practicable; 
            (5)  Include an on-line forum to solicit feedback from the public and to encourage public 
discussion on Open Data policies and public data set availability;
            (6)  Forward open data requests to the assigned DC; and,
            (7)  Take measures to ensure access to public data sets while protecting DataSF from 
unlawful abuse or attempts to damage or impair use of the website.
	
SEC. 22D.3.  STANDARDS AND COMPLIANCE.
	(a)  The CDO COIT shall establish for adoption by COIT rules and standards to 
implement the open data policy, including developing standards to determine which data sets 
are appropriate for public disclosure.  In making this determination, COIT shall balance the 
benefits of open data set forth in Section 22D.1, above, with the need to protect from 
disclosure information that is proprietary, confidential, or protected by law or contract	(b)  
Within 60 days of the effective date of this ordinance, COIT The CDO shall promulgate and COIT 
shall adopt rules and standards to implement the open data policy which shall apply to all 
Departments, consistent with COIT’s role and responsibilities in San Francisco Administrative Code 
Section 22A.3.  The CDO and COIT intend to work with CAO and purchaser to develop contract 
provisions to promote open data policies.  The rules and standards shall include the following:
            (1)  Technical technical requirements for the publishing of public data sets by 
Departments for the purpose of making public data available to the greatest number of users 
and for the greatest number of applications.  These rules shall, whenever practicable, use 
non-proprietary technical standards tor web publishing and e-government;
            (2)  Guidelines guidelines for Departments to follow in developing their plans for 
implementing the open data policy consistent with the standards established by COIT.  Each 
plan shall include an accounting of public data sets under the control of the Department; and
            (3) Rules for including open data requirements in applicable City contracts and 
standard contract provisions that promote the City's open data policies, including, where appropriate, 
provisions to ensure that  the City retains ownership of City data and the ability to post the data on 
data.sfgov.org or make it available through other means; and,
            (4)  Requirements that a third party providing City data (or applications based on City 
data) to the public explicitly identify the source and version of the public data set, and include a 
description of any modifications made to the public data set.
      (c)  COIT shall also evaluate the merits and feasibility of making City data sets available 
pursuant to a generic license, such as those offered by “Creative Commons.”  Such a license could 
grant any user the right to copy, distribute, display and create derivative works at no cost and with a 
minimum level of conditions placed on the use.  If appropriate, COIT shall specify the terms and 
conditions of such a generic license in the standards it develops it develops to implement the open data 
policy.
      (d) Prior to issuing rules and standards, COIT shall solicit comments from the public, including 
from individuals and firms who have successfully developed applications using open data sets.


APPROVED AS TO FORM:
DENNIS J. HERRERA, City Attorney


By:		
	ATTORNEY'S NAME
	Deputy City Attorney

FILE NO.	ORDINANCE NO.

Supervisor Chiu
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS		Page 1
	10/15/2012
	







